

Histones and associated chromatin proteins have essential functions in eukaryotic genome organization and regulation. Despite this fundamental role in eukaryotic cell biology, we lack a phylogenetically-comprehensive understanding of chromatin evolution. Here, we combine comparative proteomics and genomics analysis of chromatin in eukaryotes and archaea. Proteomics uncovers the existence of histone post-translational modifications in Archaea. However, archaeal histone modifications are scarce, in contrast with the highly conserved and abundant marks we identify across eukaryotes. Phylogenetic analysis reveals that chromatin-associated catalytic functions (e.g., methyltransferases) have pre-eukaryotic origins, whereas histone mark readers and chaperones are eukaryotic innovations. We show that further chromatin evolution is characterized by expansion of readers, including capture by transposable elements and viruses. Overall, our study infers detailed evolutionary history of eukaryotic chromatin: from its archaeal roots, through the emergence of nucleosome-based regulation in the eukaryotic ancestor, to the diversification of chromatin regulators and their hijacking by genomic parasites.
Capsaspora owczarzaki strain ATCC30864 filopodial cells were grown axenically in 5 ml flasks with ATCC medium 1034 (modified PYNFH medium) in an incubator at 23ºC (Sebé-Pedrós et al., 2013a).

Corallochytrium limacisporum strain India was axenically grown in Difco Marine Broth medium at 23ºC, Creolimax fragrantissima strain CH2 was axenically grown in Difco Marine Broth medium at 12ºC, Spizellomyces punctatus strain DAOM BR117 was axenically grown in (0,5% yeast extract, 3% glycerol,1g/L K2HPO4, 0,5% EtOH) medium at 17ºC, Thecamonas trahens strain ATCC50062 was grown in ATCC medium: 1525 Seawater 802 medium, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strain CC-503 cw92 mt+ was axenically grown in Gibco TAP medium at 29ºC, Guillardia theta strain CCMP2712 was axenically grown in L1+500uM NH4Cl medium at 18ºC, Emiliania huxleyi strain CCMP1516 was grown in L1-Si medium at 18ºC, Thalassiosira pseudonana strain CCMP1335 was axenically grown in L1 medium at 18ºC, Bigelowiella natans strain CCMP2755 was axenically grown in L1-Si medium at 23ºC, Naegleria gruberi strain ATCC30224 was axenically grown in ATCC medium 1034 (modified PYNFH medium) at 29ºC, Gefionella okellyi strain 249 was grown in 15% Water Complete Cereal Grass Media (WC-CGM3) at 18ºC and Fabomonas tropica strain NYK3C was grown in L1 + YT medium at 18ºC. All cells were grown in 250 ml culture flasks.

In addition, we used frozen tissues/cells from the following species: Homo sapiens (ES cells, courtesy of Cecilia Ballaré, CRG), Physcomitrella patens (strain Gransden 2004, vegetative stage, courtesy of Josep Casacuberta, CRAG-CSIC), Sycon ciliatum (adult sponges sampled from Bergen, Norway, courtesy of Maja Adamska, ANU) and Phytophthora infestans (strain T30-4, courtesy of Harold J.G.Meijer, Wageningen University).

Cultures of Methanobrevibacter cuticularis DSM 11139, Methanospirillum stamsii DSM 26304 and Methanosarcina spelaei DSM 26047 were purchased from the Deutsche Stammsammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen GmbH (DSMZ), Braunschweig, Germany. Cultures were grown in closed batch in 50mL of defined media in 120mL serum bottles (La-Pha-Pack, Langerwehe, Germany). Growth was monitored as OD (600 nm; Analytik Jena, Specord 200 plus). Methanobrevibacter-cuticularis was grown in modified Methanobrevibacter cuticularis medium DSMZ 734a (DSMZ 2014) omitting bovine rumen fluid, yeast extract and Na-resazurin at 1.5 bar overpressure H2CO2 (20 vol.-% CO2 in H2) at 37°C. As soon as a change in OD was observed, a constant agitation at 90rpm was applied. Methanospirillum stamsii was grown in modified Methanobacterium medium DSMZ 119 (DSMZ 2017) omitting sludge fluid, yeast extract and Na-resazurin at 1 bar overpressure H2CO2 (20 vol.-% CO2 in H2) at 29°C, under constant agitation at 90rpm. Methanosarcina spelaei was grown in modified Methanosarcina barkeri medium DSMZ 120a (DSMZ 2014) omitting yeast extract and Na-resazurin at 1.5 bar overpressure H2CO2 (20 vol.-% CO2 in H2) at 33°C, under constant agitation at 90rpm. All gases were obtained from Air Liquide GmbH, Schwechat, Austria. Nitrososphaera viennensis EN76 was grown in continuous culture in a bioreactor as previously described.

Cells were harvested via centrifugation at 21,000xg 4°C 1h (Thermo scientific, Sorvall Lynx 4000 centrifuge), the supernatant discarded and the resulting pellet resuspended in 1ml of spent medium, followed by another round of centrifugation at 21,000xg 4°C for 1h (Eppendorf, Centrifuge 5424R). Pellets were stored at -70°C. All archaeal histones were extracted as described below.

Starting material was a pellet of 50-100M cells (washed once with cold PBS) or a flash-frozen tissue homogenate in liquid nitrogen using a ceramic mortar grinder. Cells were washed first in 10ml of buffer I (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.4M Sucrose). After 5min incubation, samples were centrifuged at 8.000g for 20min at 4°C and supernatant was removed. The resulting pellet was resuspended in 1.5ml of Buffer II (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.25M Sucrose, 1% Triton X-100, 1% Igepal Ca-630) and incubated 15min on ice. In specific cases, cells at this stage were broken using a 2ml Dounce homogenizer (with Pestle B) or with a 20G syringe. Then samples were centrifuged at 15.000g for 10min at 4°C and supernatant was removed. The resulting pellet was then slowly resuspended in 300μL of Buffer III (10 mM TrisHCl pH 8, 2 mM MgCl2, 1.7M Sucrose, 1% Triton X-100) and then resulting resuspended nuclei were layered on top of another 300μL of Buffer III. Sample was centrifuged at 20.000g for 1h at 4°C and supernatant was removed, resulting in a nuclear pellet ready for acid histone extraction. All buffers were supplemented with spermidine (1:1000), beta-mercaptoethanol (1:1000), protease inhibitors (1x cOmplete cocktail Roche #11697498001, 1mM PMSF, 1:2000 Pepstatin), phosphatase inhibitors (1x phoSTOP cocktail Roche #4906845001) and deacetylase inhibitors (10mM Sodium butyrate).

For samples processed using a high-salt + HCl extraction protocol, the pellet was resuspended in 500μL of High Salt Extraction Buffer (20 mM TrisHCl pH 7.4, CaCl2 1M and protease, phosphatase and deacetylase inhibitors, same as above). Sample was incubated on ice for 30min and then pure HCl has added to a final 0.3N concentration (12.82μL to the initial 500μL). Samples were incubated for at least 2h on a rotor at 4°C and then centrifuged at 16.000g for 10min at 4°C to remove cellular/nuclear debris. The resulting supernatant containing solubilized histones was transferred to a clean 1.5ml tube and Trichloroacetic Acid (TCA) was added drop-wise to 25% final concentration (171μL TCA to an approximate initial 513μL sample) and left overnight at 4°C to precipitate histones. Samples were then centrifuged at 20.000g for 30min at 4°C and the supernatant removed. The pellet was then washed twice with 500μL of cold acetone and then dried for 20min at room temperature. Finally, clean histone pellets were resuspended in 30-50μL of ultrapure water. Protein concentration in the sample was measured using BCA and extraction was examined using an SDS-PAGE protein gel with Coomassie staining.

For samples processed using H2SO4, the protocol was exactly the same except that 400μL 0.4N H2SO4 (freshly diluted) was used instead, with a similar incubation time of at least 2h at 4°C.

Histones samples were quantified by the BCA method and 10 μg of each sample were derivatized with propionic anhydride, digested with trypsin and derivatized again with phenylisocyanate as previously described. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 9 μL of H2O and 1 μL of triethyl ammonium bicarbonate was added to bring the pH to 8.5. The propionic anhydride was prepared by adding 1 μL of propionic anhydride to 99 μL of H2O and 1 μL of propionic anhydride solution was added immediately to the samples with vortexing and incubation for 2 minutes. The reaction was quenched with 1 μL of 80mM hydroxylamine and samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 minutes. Tryptic digestion was performed for 3 h with 0.1 μg trypsin (Promega Sequencing Grade; Madison, WI) per sample. A 1% v/v solution of phenyl isocyanate (PIC) in acetonitrile was freshly prepared and 3 μl added to each sample (17 mM final concentration) and incubated for 60 min at 37 °C. Samples were acidified by adding 50 μL of 5% formic acid, vacuum dried and desalted with C18 ultramicrospin columns (The Nest Group, Inc, Southborough, MA).

A 2-μg aliquot of the peptide mixture was analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spec-trometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) with both collision induced dissociation (CID) and high energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.

Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 50-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 2 μm C18 particles spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) with a 90 min chromatographic gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode using a data dependent acquisition method. The “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm determined the number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation.

Acquired data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science) was used for peptide identification using a double-search strategy. First, data were searched against each organism protein database plus the most common contaminants considering Propionylation on N-terminal, Propionylation on Lysines and Phenylisocyanate on N-terminal as variable modifications. Then a new database was generated with the proteins identified in the first search,, and a second search was done considering Propionylation on N-terminal, Propionylation on Lysines, Phenylisocyanate on N-terminal, Dimethyl lysine, trimethyl lysine, propionyl + methyl lysine, acetyl lysine, crotonyl lysine as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to 5 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. The identified peptides were filtered by mascot ion score higher than 20 and only PTMs with a localization score ptmRS higher than 45 were considered. The raw proteomics data have been deposited to the PRIDE repository with the dataset identifier PXD031991.

We classified histone protein domains from a database of eukaryotic, prokaryotic and viral sequences (see details below) according to their similarity to known canonical (H2A, H2B, H3, H4) and variant histones (e.g., H2A.Z, macroH2A, cenH3 or H3.3), as well as other gene families with histone-like protein folds (e.g., the transcription factors DR1, DRAP1, NFYB/C, POLE3/4, SOS, TAF, or CHRAC). To that end, we used diamond to perform local alignments of each histone domain against (i) a set of curated histone variants obtained from HistoneDB 2.0, and (ii) annotated each domain according to the best hit in the reference database, which allowed us to classify histone fold-containing proteins as canonical histones (H2A, H2B, H3, H4) or their main variants (H2A.Z, macroH2A and cenH3). This best-hit strategy performs well in distinguishing canonical histones from each other, as well as each canonical histone from its main variants (H3 from cenH3, and H2A from H2A.Z and macroH2A; Extended Data Fig. 1a).

Then, we built a graph of pairwise similarity between histones, with edges weighted by the alignment bitscore (discarding edges with bitscore < 20). We created visualisations of each connected component in this graph using the spring layout algorithm implemented in the networkx 2.4 Python library (100 iterations, weighted by alignment bitscore). We selected the four connected components in the graph that matched the four canonical eukaryotic histones (H2A, H2B, H3, H4; discarding edges with bitscore < 20), retrieved the protein sequences for each of them, aligned them using mafft (E-INS-i mode, 1,000 iterations), and built phylogenetic trees with IQ-TREE 2.1.0 (-fast mode).

We retrieved the protein sequences of the canonical histones identified in each of the 26 species and we used them for the proteomic analysis of hPTMs, and aligned them using mafft (G-INS-i mode, up to 10,000 refinement iterations). For this subset of species, histone class identity was cross-referenced with the HistoneDB search tool. Then, we manually aligned the peptides mapping onto these proteins to identify the position of each hPTM along a consensus alignment. In the case of H3, H4, and macroH2A, the majority of alignment positions were conserved across most eukaryotes in our dataset, and we used a consensus numbering scheme. In the case of H2A, H2A.Z, and H2B, non-conserved insertions and deletions at the N-terminal tail precluded the use of a paneukaryotic numbering scheme. Instead, we reported hPTM positions based on the human homolog (if possible), or relative to taxonomically restricted conserved positions. In cases where position-wise homology could not be established, we grouped multiple amino-acids into stretches of unclear homology, which we report separately from conserved positions (question mark symbols in Fig. 1). The complete list of hPTMs and their position-wise coordinates relative to the consensus alignment is available in Supplementary Data 3.

Furthermore, we also reported the presence (in any position) of modifications in less-conserved histone variants, as well as the linker histone H1.

In addition to the 19 used in our proteomics survey, we also included previously published hPTM data from the following species (Supplementary Data 1c): the brown alga Ectocarpus siliculosus, the diatom Phaeodactylum tricornutum, the ciliate Tetrahymena thermophila, the ascomycete Neurospora crassa, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and the plant Arabidopsis thaliana. When available in public repositories, we re-analysed these datasets using the strategy described above. Finally, we also complemented our own proteomics data using previously published hPTM data from Homo sapiens and Capsaspora owczarzaki.

We identified homologs of gene families associated with eukaryotic chromatin, using a database of predicted proteomes from a selection of eukaryotic species from all major supergroups (n = 172 species; see Supplementary Data 1 for their taxonomic classification and data sources), as well as archaeal and viral peptides available in the NCBI nr peptide collection (as of 25th of April, 2020) and bacterial peptides available in RefSeq (release 99, 11th May, 2020). The database of viral sequences was complemented with peptides from 501 genomes of nucleocytoplasmic large DNA viruses.

We defined 61 gene classes associated with eukaryotic chromatin, based on HMM models obtained from the Pfam database (release 33.0). This list included canonical and linker histones (n = 2 families), chromatin-specific lysine acetylases (n = 5), deacetylases (n = 2), methyltransferases (n = 2), demethylases (n = 2), chromatin readers (n = 16), remodellers (n = 1) and chaperones (n = 13), as well as multiple families associated with the Polycomb complexes (n = 18). The complete list of gene families, including the associated HMM models, is available in Supplementary Data 4.

For each gene family, we retrieved all homologs from the eukaryotic, archaeal, bacterial and viral databases using the hmmsearch tool from the HMMER 3.3 toolkit and the gathering threshold defined in each Pfam HMM model. We recorded the taxonomic profile of each homolog.

We aimed to identify groups of orthologs within each of the 61 chromatin-associated gene families using targeted phylogenetic analyses. We followed the following strategy for each of the 59 sets of eukaryotic genes. First, we partitioned each set into one or more homology groups based on pairwise local sequence alignments using diamond 0.9.36.137 (high sensitivity all-to-all search), followed by clustering of the resulting pairwise alignments graph with MCL 14.137 (--abc mode), using low inflation values (see Supplementary Data 4) to favour inclusive groupings. Second, we performed multiple sequence alignments of each homology group with mafft 7.471 under the E-INS-i mode (optimised for multiple conserved regions), running up to 10,000 refinement iterations. Third, we trimmed the resulting multiple sequence alignments using clip-kit 0.1 (kpic-gappy mode). Fourth, we built phylogenetic trees for each trimmed alignment using IQ-TREE 2.1.0, selecting the best-fitting evolutionary model using its ModelTest module (according to the Bayesian Information Criterion) and using 1,000 UFBS bootstrap supports . Each tree was run for up to 10,000 iterations until convergence was attained (at the 0.999 correlation coefficient threshold, and for at least 200 iterations).

Then, we parsed the species composition of each gene tree in order to identify groups of orthologous proteins using the POSSVM pipeline. Specifically, we used the species overlap algorithm implemented in the ETE toolkit 3.1.1, which identifies pairs of orthologous genes in a phylogenetic tree by examining the species composition of each subtree, and classifying internal nodes as paralogy nodes (if there is overlap in the species composition between each of its two descendant subtrees) or orthology nodes (if there is no overlap). Pairs of genes linked by an orthology node are then recorded as orthology pairs. In our analysis, we used an overlap threshold=0 (i.e. any species composition overlap between the two descendant subtrees is classified as a paralogy event). The resulting list of pairwise orthology relationships between genes was clustered into groups of orthologs (orthogroups) using MCL. We further annotated each orthogroup with a string denoting the gene symbols of the human proteins therein (if any).

Overall, we classified 51,426 proteins from 61 gene classes (defined by protein structural domains), divided into 242 gene trees and 1,713 gene families (orthogroups). The source peptide sequences and gene trees used for these analyses are available in Supplementary Data 7 and 8.

We inferred the presence, gain and loss of each orthogroup along the eukaryotic tree of life, using a phylogenetic birth-and-death model implemented in Count. This tool takes a numeric profile of gene family presence/absence in extant species (172 in our dataset) and a phylogenetic tree defining their evolutionary relationships, and infers the probabilities of gain and loss of each family at each ancestral node along the tree.

First we trained the probabilistic model in Count. As a training set, we used a random sample of 1,000 PFAM domains annotated in the 172 species of interest (restricting the sampling to domains present in at least 5% of species). The final model consists of gain, loss and transfer rates with two Γ categories each, and a constant duplication rate (given that we only recorded gene presence/absence, duplication events are not included in our downstream analyses). This model was obtained in three sequential rounds of training, so as to sequentially add zero, one and two Γ categories to each evolutionary rate. Each round consisted of up to 100 iterations, and stopped when the relative change in the model log-likelihood fell by 0.1% in two consecutive rounds. The final evolutionary rates and the Newick-formatted species tree used in this step are available in the Supplementary Data 1 and Extended Data Fig. 3a.

Second, we calculated the posterior probability of gain, loss and presence of each orthogroup in our dataset with Count. The aggregated counts of gains and losses of the various classes of chromatin-associated proteins (acetylases, deacetylases, methyltransferases, demethylases, readers and remodellers) along the eukaryotic tree were obtained by summing the probabilities of gain, presence or loss of all orthogroups of a given class at each ancestral node. To investigate the evolutionary histories of specific orthogroups at a given node in the tree, we applied a probability threshold of 0.9 (for presence) or 0.5 (to identify the most probable gain and loss node). The Count model was not able to calculate ancestral probabilities for a few orthogroups with widespread phylogenetic distributions, due to violations of the birth-and-death model (25 out of 1,713 families). In order to be able to report presence probabilities in the LECA for these orthogroups, we inferred their presence in this ancestor using the Wagner parsimony procedure implemented in Count with a gain-to-loss penalty g = 5, and recorded their presence as binary values (0/1) accordingly.

We annotated the Pfam domains present in each protein from the gene classes listed in Supplementary Data 4, using Pfamscan 1.6-3 and the Pfam 33.0 database. We visualized the networks of protein domain co-occurrence from the point of view of the core domain(s) that define each gene class, using the networkx Python library (version 2.4). Specifically, we built a graph where each node represented ‘accessory’ domains (i.e. domains that co-occur with the ‘core’ domain that defines given gene class), node size reflected number of co-occurrences with the ‘core’ domain, and edges reflected co-occurrences between accessory domains. We identified communities of frequently co-occurring accessory domains using the label propagation algorithm implemented in networkx (communities submodule), which we used as a basis to manually annotate groups of co-occurring domains of interest (Fig. 5c). Network visualizations were created using the NEATO spring layout algorithm from the Graphviz 2.40.1 Python library.

In parallel, we also recorded the presence of Pfam domains within individual orthogroups, and their taxonomic distribution.

We retrieved all eukaryotic domains from gene class shared with prokaryotes (Histones, Acetyltransf_1, GNAT_acetyltr_2, MOZ_SAS, Hist_deacetyl, SIR2, DOT1, SET, CupinJmjC, ING, MBT, PWWP and SNF2_N), collapsing identical sequences at 100% similarity with CD-HIT 4.8.1, and identified their closest homologs amongst the corresponding archaea and bacteria protein domain sets, using diamond local alignments (high sensitivity search). The archaeal and bacterial protein sets were also reduced with CD-HIT (at 95% and 90% sequence similarity, respectively). Each set of sequences was then partitioned into low-granularity homology clusters using the MCL-based strategy described above (inflation I = 1.2), and a phylogenetic tree was then constructed from each homology cluster with IQ-TREE (as described above).

Then, we mapped each eukaryotic gene to its orthogroup (obtained from eukaryotic-only analyses, see above) and used the distribution of phylogenetic distances from the prokaryotic+eukaryotic gene trees to classify them according to their similarity to (i) eukaryotic genes in other orthogroups, (ii) archaeal homologs, or (iii) bacterial homologs. Specifically, we used a majority-voting procedure in which we recorded the number of sequences of eukaryotic, archaeal or bacterial origin amongst the ten nearest neighbors of each gene (measuring intergenic distances as substitutions per site), and assigned the most common taxonomic group as the ‘closest’ homolog of that gene (minimum 50% agreement). This fraction is termed ‘Phylogenetic affinity score’ and reported in Supplementary Data 5. The pairwise distances were obtained from each gene tree using the cophenetic distance method in the cophenetic.phylo utility of the ape 5.4 R library.

We retrieved all classified genes from our eukaryotic dataset that contained transposon-associated Pfam domains (version 33.0), using a list compiled from (complete list in Supplementary Data 4), totaling 823 candidate fusions from 91 species (listed in Supplementary Data 6). We annotated these genes to their most similar known TE element by aligning them against the Dfam 3.3 database using the tblastn program in BLAST 2.2.31.

We validated each candidate fusion using the following criteria: (i) contiguity of the gene model on the genome assembly, i.e., recording which genes were interrupted by poly-N stretches (which might indicate an incorrect gene model); (ii) evidence of expression in at least one sample from a range of publicly available transcriptomic experiments (from the NCBI SRA repository); (iii) evidence of contiguous expression, i.e., whether an expressed transcript had mapped reads along the entire region located between the ‘core’ and ‘TE-associated’ domains; (iv) we also recorded the number of exons per gene; and (v) located near any other candidate fusion gene in the genome.

The list of SRA experiments used for these validation steps is available in Supplementary Data 1. This list includes 64 out of 91 species for which transcriptomics datasets are publicly available, and covers 768 out of the 822 TE fusion candidates (93%). RNA-seq read mapping was performed with bwa mem 0.7.17-r1188 using the complete set of spliced transcripts of each species as the reference database. We used bedtools 2.29.2 to identify poly-N stretches in the genome assembly (assembly contiguity criterion). We identified regions of low coverage along the transcript sequence (expression contiguity criterion) using the bedtools genomecov utility, requiring that the coverage along both domains involved in each fusion and their intermediate regions be higher or equal to two reads.

We investigated the homology of the viral chromatin-associated genes (which included 19 out of 61 families present in our survey) using joint phylogenetic analyses of protein domains from virus, prokaryotic and eukaryotic genes. We used the same method described above to investigate the prokaryotic roots of eukaryotic gene classes: we aligned viral domains against a database of cellular homologs (high sensitivity diamond search), followed by low-granularity MCL clustering (inflation I = 1.2) and phylogenetic tree building (IQ-TREE). Then, we used the same majority-voting procedure described above to classify viral homologs according to their similarity to eukaryotic, archaeal or bacterial gene families based on their distribution of phylogenetic distances. For viral genes that were most similar to eukaryotic genes, we used the same procedure to map them to their closest eukaryotic orthogroup.

The complete list of viral genes and their phylogenetic annotation is available in Supplementary Data 6. Out of 2,163 viral genes in our dataset, 2,144 could be annotated as similar to a particular cellular group using this procedure (99.1%), and the majority of these genes had a high agreement in the annotations of their nearest neighbors (2,096 with ≥50% agreement; 1,449 with ≥90% agreement).

In the case of viral histones, we built a separate phylogeny with a few modifications in our protocol: (i) we used additional viral genes obtained from as a reference; (ii) we omitted the CD-HIT reduction and MCL partitioning steps, and jointly analyzed the entire set of homologs instead; and (iii) in the phylogenetic reconstruction step, we used the approximate Bayes posterior probabilities implemented in IQ-TREE.

We retrieved all archaeal histone domains classified belonging to the HMfB-like connected component in Fig. 1b, and retained those that fulfilled the following criteria: (i) contained a complete CBFD_NFYB_HMF domain according to the hmmscan search (defined as an alignment starting at least at the 10th position of the HMM model, and up to the 55th position; the HMM model contains 65 positions); and (ii) the predicted tail (N-terminal to the core domain boundaries defined by hmmscan) was at least 10 residues long. 84 genes passed these filters, including three N-terminal containing histones previously identified by Henneman et al.. A complete list is available in Supplementary Data 2. We manually examined the sequences of archaeal tails and aligned four sets of similar histones with mafft G-INS-i (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Alignments were plotted using the msa 1.24.0 library in R.