

Systems-wide profiling of breast cancer has almost always entailed RNA and DNA analysis by microarray and sequencing techniques. Marked developments in proteomic technologies now enable very deep profiling of clinical samples, with high identification and quantification accuracy. We analysed 40 oestrogen receptor positive (luminal), Her2 positive and triple negative breast tumours and reached a quantitative depth of >10,000 proteins. These proteomic profiles identified functional differences between breast cancer subtypes, related to energy metabolism, cell growth, mRNA translation and cell–cell communication. Furthermore, we derived a signature of 19 proteins, which differ between the breast cancer subtypes, through support vector machine (SVM)-based classification and feature selection. Remarkably, only three proteins of the signature were associated with gene copy number variations and eleven were also reflected on the mRNA level. These breast cancer features revealed by our work provide novel insights that may ultimately translate to development of subtype-specific therapeutics.

 Breast cancers have been extensively studied at the genomic and transcriptomic levels in the hope of tailoring therapeutic regimens. Here the authors generate deep coverage proteomes from several clinical breast cancer samples, and use machine learning techniques to uncover biological processes altered in specific cancer subtypes.
FFPE tumour blocks were obtained from the Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland. The use of these samples for research was approved by the ethical committee of the institute. Forty breast tumour samples were selected for analysis, including 14 ERPR tumours, 15 Her2 and 11 TN (Supplementary Table 1). To enrich for cancer cells in the samples and eliminate high concentrations of stromal proteins, highly cellular regions were selected based on hematoxylin and eosin staining and after pathological examination, these regions were punched out from the paraffin block.

Tumour samples were deparaffinized with two 5 min incubations in xylene, followed by two 5 min incubations with absolute ethanol. After removal of ethanol, samples were vacuum-dried and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 100 mM Tris HCl pH 7.5, 4% SDS and 100 mM DTT. Samples were briefly sonicated, and incubated for 1 h at 95 °C.

The super-SILAC mix was composed of HCC1599, MCF7, HCC1937 cells (purchased from the German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, DSMZ), HCC2218 (purchased from the American Type Culture Collection, ATCC) and HMEC (purchased from Lonza). Super-SILAC mix was prepared less than a year after the purchase of cells. Cells were metabolically labelled with 13C615N4-arginine (Arg-10) and l-13C615N2-lysine (Lys-8). Labelled amino acids were purchased from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. HCC1599, HCC2218 and HCC1937 cells were SILAC-labelled by culturing them in RPMI in which the natural lysine and arginine were replaced by Lys-8 and Arg-10 and supplemented with 10% dialyzed serum and antibiotics. MCF7 cells were grown in DMEM containing Lys-8 and Arg-10 instead of the natural amino acids and supplemented with 10% dialyzed serum and antibiotics. Human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) were cultured in Gibco Defined Keratinocyte-serum free medium with Lys-8 and Arg-10 instead of the natural amino acids. Cells were cultured for ∼8 doublings in the SILAC medium to reach complete labelling. Sub-confluent cultures of HMEC, HCC1937 and MCF7 were lysed. HCC2218 and HCC1599, which grow in suspension, were lysed in a state of exponential growth. All cells were washed with PBS before lysis and lysed with a buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris HCl (pH 7.6) and 100 mM DTT. Lysates were incubated at 95 °C for 5 min, and then briefly sonicated. Protein concentrations of cell and tissue lysates were determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. The measurements were performed in 8 M urea using tryptophan as the standard. Super-SILAC was prepared by combining equal protein amounts of each of the protein lysates.

Equal protein amounts of the super-SILAC mix and each of the tissue samples were combined and trypsin digested using the FASP protocol. Briefly, lysates were diluted 1:8 in 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris HCl pH 8.0 and loaded onto 30 kDa microcon devices (Millipore). FASP procedure included the following steps: SDS buffer replacement with 8M urea buffer, protein alkylation with iodoacetamide and replacement of urea buffer with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Sequencing grade trypsin was then added to the samples at a ratio of 1:50 (μg trypsin: μg protein) and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After digestion peptides were collected with two washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Peptide concentrations were determined by ultraviolet-light absorption at 280 nm.

We fractionated the peptides of each of the samples into six fractions by strong anion exchange chromatography in a StageTip format as described previously. Briefly, microcolumns were assembled by stacking six layers of Empore Anion Exchange disk (Varian) in 200-μl pipette tips. Column equilibration and elution was performed in Britton & Robinson buffer (20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid and 20 mM acetic acid). The buffer was titrated with sodium hydroxide to the following pH: 3, 4, 5, 6, 8 and 11 for subsequent elution. Eluted peptides were purified and concentrated on C18 StageTips. Sample preparation of all samples was performed simultaneously.

Peptides were eluted from StageTips with 80% acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid (buffer B) and vacuum concentrated to reach a volume of 6 μl. Samples were separated on in-house made 30-cm-reverse phase columns (75 μm inner diameter, 1.8 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads) on an EASY-nLC nano high performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). HPLC was coupled online via a nano-electrospray ion source to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% acetic acid) and separated with a 200-min water-acetonitrile gradient. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed for the top-10 peaks in each MS scan. Resolution of the MS scans was 70,000 (at m/z=200 Th) and 17,500 for the MS/MS scans. MS measurements for the different samples were randomized to eliminate technical artifacts.

Raw MS files were analysed with the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.4 (ref.). MS/MS spectra were searched in the Andromeda search engine against the forward and reverse Human Uniprot database including the variable modifications methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Parent peptide masses and fragment masses were searched with maximal initial mass deviation of 6–20 p.p.m., respectively. Mass recalibration was performed with a preceding Andromeda search with a mass window of 20 p.p.m. A first level of FDR filtration was done on the peptide-spectrum match level, and this was followed by a second level of FDR control on the protein level. Both filtrations were performed at a FDR of 0.01. These filtrations were done using a standard target-decoy database approach. When two proteins (isoforms and homologues with two Uniprot identifiers) could not be distinguished based on the identified peptides, these were merged by MaxQuant to one protein group.

The bioinformatics analysis was mainly performed using our in-house freely available software Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org). Analysis steps that were performed in the statistical analysis environment R (ref.) are described where applicable.

MSigDB analysis. The corresponding molecular signatures from the MSigDB were mapped to each protein in our data set. We employed a generalization of the one dimensional enrichment test, named here as annotation matrix analysis. In this analysis, the distribution of mean differences of all proteins in a category is tested for a significant shift with respect to the global distribution of values in a particular subtype. The analysis results in the identification of categories (that is, molecular signatures) that show differential expression in a particular breast cancer subtype.

Tree-maps. KEGG pathway annotations for each protein group in our data set were inferred from UniProt matching by UniProt id. Using the KEGG BRITE functional hierarchies, each protein was further assigned to the next two levels in the hierarchy corresponding to that pathway. The mean difference between one of the subtypes and the other two was computed for each protein. Enrichment of a given category in each breast cancer subtype was computed with one dimensional annotation enrichment test as described above. The analysis employs the non-parametric Wilcoxon–Mann–Whitney test that uses rank sums and an enrichment score indicates if a category is enriched for high expression (the score is close to 1) or low expression (close to −1). Multiple hypothesis testing is performed using the Benjamini–Hochberg correction at 5% significance level. The R package ‘treemap' was used for plotting.

Feature selection: a computational platform based on SVMs was developed and employed for the identification of proteins that strongly discriminate between three different breast cancer subtypes. The core of the classification module relies on the libsvm implementation and adds on a complete analysis framework. Before classification, missing values were imputed in each sample by drawing random numbers from a normal distribution characterized by a specific downshift with respect to the available values distribution and a fixed s.d. This approach assumes that the missing values result from low abundant proteins. To assure maximum generalizability of the results the feature selection was embedded in a random sampling cross-validation procedure. The total number of patient samples was divided into train and test sets where the test set comprised 15% of the total data. The random sampling procedure was repeated 250 times. For each cross-validation run the features in the training set were ranked using ANOVA-based ranking method. In this method, t-tests were applied to each feature comparing its expression in each subtype with the rest of the samples and the resulting P values were used to rank the features.

On ranking different sets of features of increasing size were used to predict the breast cancer subtype of the samples in the test set. The accuracy for each cross-validation run and set of ranked features was calculated using SVMs as a classifier and recorded. The one-vs-rest implementation of the SVMs resulted in three separate ranked lists—one for each subtype. The optimal number of features, that is, the minimum number of proteins that classify the samples with the smallest error, was defined from the final accuracy curve, computed from averaging the accuracies over all cross-validation runs. Receiver operating characteristic curves were plotted and the area under the curve was computed with the pROC package in R.

Copy number variation and gene expression data were obtained from Curtis et al. for 1,992 breast cancer patients. To identify differentially expressed genes and genome regions with differential copy number variation standard ANOVA tests implemented in Perseus were employed using permutation-based FDR and significance level of 5%.

Accession codes: The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium46 via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD002619.

How to cite this article: Tyanova, S. et al. Proteomic maps of breast cancer subtypes. Nat. Commun. 7:10259 doi: 10.1038/ncomms10259 (2016).