

Proteogenomic approaches have enabled the generat̲ion of novel information levels when compared to single omics studies although burdened by extensive experimental efforts. Here, we improved a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry proteogenomic workflow to reveal distinct molecular features related to mammographic appearances in breast cancer. Our results reveal splicing processes detectable at the protein level and highlight quantitation and pathway complementarity between RNA and protein data. Furthermore, we confirm previously detected enrichments of molecular pathways associated with estrogen receptor-dependent activity and provide novel evidence of epithelial-to-mesenchymal activity in mammography-detected spiculated tumors. Several transcript–protein pairs displayed radically different abundances depending on the overall clinical properties of the tumor. These results demonstrate that there are differentially regulated protein networks in clinically relevant tumor subgroups, which in turn alter both cancer biology and the abundance of biomarker candidates and drug targets.
Two samples sets of breast cancer tissues (set 1: 21 samples and set 2: 24 samples) were analyzed by RNA-sequencing and MS analyses. DDA MS analysis was performed for downstream spectral library generation for downstream DIA MS (Figure 1). Samples were processed as ALLPREP flow-throughs (FT) and whole tissue lysates (WTL). FTs were analyzed by RNA-sequencing, DDA MS, and DDA MS. WTL samples were analyzed using DDA MS and merged with their FT counterparts to maximize the number of peptides included in the spectral library. Two external datasets were also employed (Tyanova and Bouchal datasets) were employed to maximize the search space for the DIA MS data. The RNA, DDA, and DIA datasets constituted the basis for all the analyses described in this manuscript.

Out of a large breast cancer dataset consisting of 172 samples, a subset of 21 frozen breast tissue specimens was collected for this study (Figure 1A). All specimens were collected from women with primary breast cancer, who underwent tumor resection between 1991 and 2004. Estrogen and progesterone receptor (ER and PgR) statuses were assessed in tumor tissues by quantitative biochemical assays. The tumor content was derived from microscopic analysis of the tumor cell area in hematoxylin–eosin-stained tissue slices by two independent trained researchers. Breast cancer molecular subtype classification was derived from previously acquired expression data using the AIMS algorithm. IntClust classification was derived by processing the RNA-seq data using the IC10 package (v1.5).

The most dominant mammographic appearance of the tumor was retrospectively collected by one specialist in radiology (HS). Tumors were categorized as spiculated or other tumor appearances such as microcalcifications or well-defined masses (nonspiculated) based on their most dominating mammographic feature (i.e., appearance categorization). Examples of digital mammographic images are shown in Figure 1B. An overlap between spiculation and ER statuses is displayed in Figure 1C,D. A set of four normal breast tissues was also collected after a breast-reduction surgery at Lund University Hospital and used to generate the DIA spectral library. This subset of samples was selected based on the following clinical criteria: a breast volume of more than 800 mL, no previous case nor familial history of breast or ovarian cancer, nonsmoker, no diabetes mellitus, and a body mass index below 30.

An additional dataset of 24 primary breast tumors was derived from a separate study (De Marchi et al., unpublished) was analyzed by DIA MS and RNA-seq to validate our findings. This set was derived from a larger cohort of (109 samples), and tumors were selected based on availability of appearance data. Subtype classification and clinical and histopathological characteristics of breast cancer patient-derived specimens are reported in Figure 1C,D and Tables S1 and S2.

All tissues were collected from Lund University Hospital and affiliated clinics located in the Skåne region.

This study used primary breast tumor tissues under approval from the Ethical Review Board (Etikprövningsnämnden) with number DNR 2010/127.

All breast cancer specimens and normal tissues were processed through an AllPrep (Qiagen) protocol for the lysis and extraction of RNA and proteins (Figure 1E). Except for the extraction of total protein content, all protocols were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AllPrep RNA extraction kit). An amount of 20–30 mg of frozen tissues was cut and collected into tubes for downstream RNA and protein extraction. An adjacent piece, or imprint in cases where not enough tissue for embedding was available, was taken for microscopy and evaluation of the cancer content at the center performing RNA extraction. Steel beads (ID 79656, Qiagen) were added to each sample tube together with 400 μL of 1% β-mercaptoethanol in RLT buffer (Qiagen) and 2 μL of an antifoam agent (ID 19088, Qiagen). Tissue disruption was then performed in a TissueLyser LT (Qiagen) for 4 min at 50 Hz, after which a second volume of 400 μL of 1% β-mercaptoethanol in RLT buffer (AllPrep DNA/RNA Minikit, Qiagen) was added after the steel bead removal. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000×g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube kept at −80 °C until RNA and protein extraction.

RNA extraction was performed as per manufacturer instructions using the AllPrep RNA Minikit (Qiagen). Flow-through of each column constituted the protein fraction, which was collected and stored at −80 °C prior to MS sample preparation.

The amount, concentration, and quality of the extracted RNA were tested using a Bioanalyzer 2100 instrument (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), NanoDrop ND-1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA), or Caliper HT RNA LabChip (Perkin Elmer, MA, USA). All samples had a RNA integrity value (RIN) of 6.0 or higher.

RNA-sequencing analysis was conducted as previously described. Briefly, RNA concentration was measured in all AllPrep RNA eluates using a Qubit fluorometer following preparation with Qubit RNA HS assay (Thermo Fisher). A total of 100 ng of RNA input was then used for cDNA library preparation using a TruSeq Stranded mRNA NeoPrep kit (Illumina), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Library cDNA concentration was then measured using a QuantIT dsDNA HS assay kit (Thermo Fisher), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. cDNA libraries were then denatured and diluted according to the NextSeq 500 system guide (protocol #15048776, Illumina). RNA-sequencing analysis was then performed on a NextSeq 500 (Illumina) sequencer generating paired-end reads of length 77 bp.

Collected protein flow-throughs (FT) were subjected to protein precipitation for downstream protein content determination using a bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA, Thermo Fisher) and trypsin protein digestion. Protein extraction was performed by collecting the flow-through of RNeasy spin columns and by performing protein precipitation as follows: for every sample tube, three volumes of acetone were added and samples were incubated at −20 °C for 1 h. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000×g for 20 min, and the supernatant was removed. Protein pellets were washed twice with 200 μL of 95% ethanol solution for 10 min at room temperature. For FT samples, protein quantitation was performed by BCA assay after resuspension of the protein pellet in 1× PBS.

For whole tissue lysate (WTL) preparation, frozen tissues were prepared according to previously published protocols, with minor modifications. Briefly, 10 slices of 10 μm in thickness were cut for each frozen specimen and resuspended in ∼100 μL of ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (150 mM sodium chloride, 1.0% NP-40 substitute, 0.5% w/v sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate, 50 mM tris-(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, pH 8.0) supplemented with Halt protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher) and sonicated in a cooled bioruptor-type sonicator (Diagenode) for 15 min. Lysates were then centrifuged at 14,000×g for 20 min at 4 °C, and supernatants were transferred in a new tube. Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher).

For downstream trypsin digestion, proteins were precipitated in acetone and washed in ethanol solution (as previously described). Briefly, precipitated protein pellets were then resuspended 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol and 4% w/v sodium dodecyl sulfate and incubated at 95 °C for 30 min under mild agitation. Samples were then cooled to room temperature and diluted in 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) buffer for downstream protein digestion. Samples were then loaded on 30 KDa molecular filters (Millipore) and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 20 min. Filters with immobilized proteins were then washed with 100 μL of 8 M urea buffer and centrifuged at 14,000×g for 10 min. Filters with immobilized proteins were then incubated with 8 M urea buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Filters were washed twice with 8 M urea buffer followed by two washes with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.0). Proteins were then digested with trypsin (enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50) at 37 °C for 16 h under agitation (600 RPM). Filters were then centrifuged at 14,000×g for 20 min to retrieve tryptic peptides.

For DDA MS analysis (sample set 1), a total of 50 μg of the protein content was digested for each sample followed by strong anion-exchange fractionation following previously described protocols. Briefly, digested peptides were dried and resuspended in Britton and Robinson universal buffer (20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid, and 20 mM acetic acid in ultrapure water; BRUB, pH 11) and loaded on strong anion-exchange (SAX; six stacked layers; 66888-U, Sigma) stage tips. SAX filter-containing tips were put on top of C18 (three stacked layers; 66883-U, Sigma) stage tips, and peptides were eluted with 100 μL of pH 11 BRUB buffer. SAX stage tips were then transferred onto new C18 tips, and peptides were eluted serially at different pHs: 8, 6, 5, 4, and 3. C18 tips were then collected, washed with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ultrapure water, and eluted with 100 μL of a solution containing 0.1% FA and 80% acetonitrile in ultrapure water. To eliminate any possible remaining contaminants, eluates were dried and subjected to SP3 peptide purification (as described in Hughes et al.). Briefly, 2 μL of SP3 beads (1:1 ratio of Sera Mag A and Sera Mag B resuspended in ultrapure water, Sigma) was added to dried peptides and incubated for 2 min under gentle agitation. A volume of 200 μL of acetonitrile was then added, and samples were incubated for 10 min under agitation. Sample vials were then placed on a magnetic rack and washed again with acetonitrile for 10 min. Elution was performed by adding 200 μL of 2% dimethyl sulfoxide in water to the beads–peptides mixture and incubating them for 5 min under agitation. Supernatants were then collected, dried, and stored at −80 °C until MS analysis.

For downstream DIA MS analysis (sample sets 1 and 2), a total of 10 μg of protein was digested as previously mentioned, omitting SAX stage tip-based fractionation. Solid-phase extraction was performed using the SP3 method, as aforementioned.

Global proteome DDA MS analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer (sample set 1). Around 1 μg of tryptic peptides from fractionated samples was separated on an RP-HPLC EasySpray column (ID 75 μm × 25 cm C18 2 μm 100 Å resin, Thermo Fisher) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher).

For DDA analysis of SAX-fractionated samples, peptides from each fraction (n of fractions: 6) were eluted in a 90 min gradient (flow: 300 nL/min, mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O, mobile phase B: 99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). The chromatographic gradient was run as follows: 5% B for 5 min, 5–30% B in 85 min, 95% B for 10 min. The 15 most abundant peaks from the MS scan (resolution: 70,000 at 200 m/z) were selected and fragmented by higher energy induced collision dissociation (HCD, collision energy: 30). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (window: 20 s). The AGC target for both full MS and MS/MS scans was set to 1 × 106. Precursor ions with intensity above 1.7 × 104 were selected for MS/MS scan triggering.

For DIA MS analysis (sample sets 1 and 2), a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer was employed. Unfractionated samples were eluted in a 120 min gradient (flow: 300 nL/min, mobile phase A: 0.1% formic acid in H2O, mobile phase B: 80.0% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) on a Q-Exactive HFX (Thermo Fisher) instrument coupled online to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher). Digested peptides were separated by RP-HPLC (ID 75 μm × 50 cm C18 2 μm 100 Å resin, Thermo Fisher). The gradient was run as follows: 10–30% B in 90 min; 30–45% B in 20 min; 45–90% B in 30 s, and 90% B for 9 min. One high-resolution MS scan (resolution: 60,000 at 200 m/z) was performed and followed by a set of 32 DIA MS cycles with variable isolation windows (resolution: 30,000 at 200 m/z, isolation windows: 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 23, 25, 29, 37, 45, 51, 66, 132 m/z; overlap between windows: 0.5 m/z). Ions within each window were fragmented by HCD (collision energy: 30). The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS scans was set to 1 × 106 for MS and MS/MS scans, with ion accumulation time set to 100 and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS, respectively (Table S3).

DDA-derived RAW files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.6.0.16). MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda built-in search engine against the Uniprot-Swissprot human proteome database (version download 2017.06.12). Label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between run options were enabled. The chosen protease was trypsin. Identification of peptides resulting from missed cleavages was allowed. Fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of Cys residues. Precursor ion tolerance: 20 and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches, respectively. Variable modifications: acetylation of the N-terminal residue, oxidation of Met residues. Proteins were then filtered for false discovery rate (q-value <1%), reverse sequences (excluded), contaminants (excluded), and identification of unique peptides (at least one unique peptide per protein). LFQ intensities were then Log2 transformed and protein-level scaled prior to statistical analysis.

The workflow used in the spectral library generation for the DIA search is described in Figures S1A and S2A. This computational pipeline uses the DDA raw data by first employing MaRaCluster (v0.05.0, build date: Apr 16, 2018 21:04:32) to cluster the spectra and then generating consensus spectra from the clustering using a 5% clustering p-value cutoff. Other parameters in MaRaCluster were set to default. In the next step, the consensus spectra of the selected clusters were searched against the protein sequence database (Uniprot-Swissprot version download 2017.06.12 for general protein quantification) using Comet (v2017.01 rev. 4), and the resulting peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were scored by Percolator (v3.02.1, build date: Aug 13, 2018 15:50:58). The resulting scored PSMs were then processed using an in-house built python script that selected (for each peptide) the spectral match with the best q-value smaller than 10%. Subsequently, our script extracted transitions from each spectrum by matching peaks to theoretical ion masses within 1 ppm (only y and b ions were considered here since these were the most commonly observed ions). The resulting output consisted of an OpenSWATH compatible generic transition list (GTL) in tsv format. We applied this workflow to three sets of raw DDA files (parameter sets were similar to those of MaxQuant, where applicable): the datasets generated in this study are the Tyanova and Bouchal datasets.

To select a set of internal iRT peptides (i.e., peptides that are endogenously present in each sample run), OpenSWATH was run without iRT peptide input to extract the best peptide candidates (i.e., eluting within peptide-dense chromatogram regions) to be used as iRT peptides for the next iteration (Figure S1B). Naturally occurring peptides allow for high-accuracy alignment of feature, increasing identification sensitivity.

We used a Python script to extract from the resulting OSW files a set of peptides that were detected closest to their library retention time (at most 10 min). These were then additionally filtered based on peak width (i.e., less than 16.5 s at the base) and intensity (i.e., at least 1 × 105). Peptides detected in less than 20 samples were discarded, and the remaining set of peptides was randomly subsampled to not more than 100 peptides per retention time (RT) bin when splitting the DIA gradient into 20 equally sized RT bins. This set of peptides was then used in the next step to fit a lasso iRT model with OpenSWATH (with parameters related to the DDA searches, where applicable), and the results were again processed to extract the best-fitting, sharp-peaked peptides that were found in many samples. Each set of output files was scored using PyProphet (v2.0.1) by merging a subsample of 5% of the peptide-spectral matches (PSM) from each sample and scoring the merged dataset (scoring level: MS1–MS2). The resulting model (build on a representative sample comprised of 5% from each individual sample) was then back-propagated to the individual samples and used for their scoring. The scored samples were then passed to the feature alignment.py script for TRIC alignment. After five iterations, the number of proteins identified with this method seemed to stabilize (4219, 4281, 4298, 4302, and 4301, respectively, using the library generated from our DDA data), and for this, we chose the last iteration results as our dataset for further analysis.

After requantification, 28,746 peptides covering 4936 proteins were quantified. These were scaled by per-sample median intensity to account for sample-level differences. A Log2-transformed, mean-centered, and standard deviation-scaled version of this matrix was generated both on the peptide and protein levels. For protein summarization, we first selected for each protein the larges subgroup of at least three peptides that had a Spearman correlation of at least 0.7 among them, summed those peptides intensities, and applied the Log2 transformation, scaling, and centering on this summed intensity. We applied the same workflow to all three generated libraries (our own, Tyanova, and Bouchal) individually.

If the peptide is quantified in our own library, we used that p-value.

If the peptide is quantified in only one library, we used that p-value.

If the peptide is quantified in both the Tyanova and Bouchal libraries, but not in our library, we used the quantification with the lower p-value.

For general peptide quantification, we employed three libraries (Subtypes, Tyanova, and Bouchal) in the DIAnRT workflow to create three respective sets of peptide quantifications, which were combined before PyProphet scoring. For each peptide in the superset of quantified peptides from all three libraries, p-values were selected according to the following rules:

Peptide quantifications were then combined into a single table and processed with PyProphet for q-value calculations followed by feature alignment between DIA runs and requantification based on the alignment.

The demultiplexed RNA-Seq reads were aligned to the GRCh38 human reference genome using a STAR aligner (v020201) with an overhang value of 75 to match the read length. Subsequently, we employed the standard GATK analysis pipeline including duplicate removal, indel realignment, and base quality score recalibration (GATK v3.7-0-gcfedb67).

The resulting bam files were processed using the DESeq2 R/Bioconductor package (version 1.22.2) by first generating per-gene read counts mapping to the GRCh38 GTF file from Ensembl version 95 using the summarizeOverlaps function in “Union” mode so to count reads that uniquely mapping to exactly one exon of a gene. After discarding genes with no counts in any of the samples, DESeq analysis was performed with the ER status (i.e., ER positive and ER negative) as the explanatory variable in the model followed by log-fold-change shrinkage. A separate DESeq analysis was also performed using the mammographic appearance (i.e., spiculated and nonspiculated tumors) status as the explanatory variable.

For DTU detection (the computational workflow is shown in Figure S1C), we employed RNA-guided spectral libraries. The BANDITs workflow was employed to analyze the RNA-seq data and to determine a set of genes with differential transcript usage in the comparison of ER-positive and ER-negative samples.

To verify DTUs at the proteome level, an isoform-aware spectral library was generated from the Ensembl GRCh38 human proteome by in silico tryptic digestion of all protein isoforms found in this database and the determination for each peptide the set of protein isoforms it matched to. For each unique combination of isoforms, all matching peptides of at least length five amino acids were concatenated to create a mock protein sequence specific to that combination of isoforms. Using the resulting FASTA file and our DDA data, an isoform-aware spectral library was created, where each detectable peptide was matched to a set of protein isoforms identified by their Ensembl protein IDs. The DIAnRT workflow was employed on this library to quantify peptides in an isoform aware fashion from our DIA data (i.e., by reusing the set of RT peptides generated in the iterative DIA quantification process described above). Quantified peptide intensities of those proteins that matched to genes with significant differential transcript usage were overlaid onto those determined by the BANDITs workflow on the RNA-seq data.

For SNV/SAAV evaluation (Figure S1D), SNV calls were derived out of the aligned RNA-seq reads using the h5vc R/Bioconductor package with the callVariants function, requiring at least 2 reads supporting the variant and at least 10 reads total coverage. Similar to previously published workflows employed for the analysis of DDA datasets, we annotated the SNVs using the Ensembl variant effect predictor and filtered the SAAVs to retain only those events that modify the amino acid sequence of the affected protein.

By using the set of SAAV calls obtained from the RNA-seq data, we generated (for each SAAV) its derived protein sequence (DIA level only) and used in silico digestion to determine the resulting set of tryptic peptides. By discarding all peptides that also arose from the unmodified reference sequence, a set of peptides that specifically identify each SAAV was determined (typically only one peptide, except where SAAVs generated new tryptic peptides). From these results, a FASTA file containing the concatenated peptide sequences that identify each SAAV was created and subsequently used as an input within the MakeGTL workflow to create a SAAV library for downstream SAAV quantification.

Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues were cut into 3–4 μm sections and put on FLEX IHC microscope slides (K8020, DAKO). Slides were heated at 60 °C for 60 min and deparaffinized in xylene (2 × 10 min). Rehydration was performed in decreasing concentrations of ethanol (100% ethanol: 1 × 5 min, 95% ethanol: 1 × 5 min) followed by rinsing in distilled water. The immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for KI67 was performed using an Autostainer Plus (DAKO) instrument. Antigen retrieval was performed on a PT-LINK (Agilent) instrument using the EnVision FLEX target retrieval solution (pH 9, dilution: 1:10) at 98 °C for 20 min. Slides were stained by incubating the primary antibody (Ki67:clone MIB-1, M7240, Agilent Technologies) at the following dilution: 1:200 (temperature: RT, time: 30 min). The antibody–antigen complex was visualized using the EnVision FLEX DAB detection kit (K801021-2, Agilent Technologies) and counterstained with Mayer’s hematoxylin (S3309, Agilent Technologies). Stained slides were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol (95% ethanol: 1 × 3 min, 100% ethanol: 1 × 3 min), followed by xylene (2 × 5 min). Cover glasses were mounted using a Coverslipper DAKO (Agilent Technologies), and slides were left to dry prior to staining evaluation.

All HE evaluations and IHC staining scorings were evaluated and performed by a trained pathologist (GP). For KI67, only the percentage of positive tumor cells was assessed. The KI67 status was defined by the current standard of practice in Southern Sweden (positivity cutoff: ≥ 30).

In the analyses of the tumors included in sample set 1, proteins with less than 30% missing observations (<30% missing data) in the DDA set were included. This resulted in a list of 2796 proteins. Welch-corrected t test was performed to assess significant differences followed by Benjamini–Hochberg p-value adjustment as multiple test correction.

In our correlation analyses between transcript and protein abundances, we employed Spearman correlation to calculate both the correlation coefficient and p-value. To assess whether specific protein clusters were affected by different mRNA-protein correlation distributions, all proteins were annotated with GOBP terms; the distribution of correlation coefficients of each GOBP annotation was then tested against the background (i.e., all proteins) by t test followed by Benjamini–Hochberg p-value adjustment. The selected adjusted p-value cutoff for GOBP annotation was 0.15.

In all the analyses for differential pathway enrichment between ER statuses (ER positive vs ER negative), we performed gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA, database: Hallmarks v5.2, permutation type: gene set, scoring: weighted, metric: t test, other parameters were kept at default settings, significance cutoff: FDR < 0.25) on RNA, DDA (FT subset only), and DIA data layers. Input data tables were filtered as follows: RNA (no filtering), DDA (<30% missing observations), and DIA (<30% missing observations). Enrichment scores of the top50 (or all if <50)-significant (i.e., by q-value) pathways were then plotted for each data layer.

To define protein co-regulation clusters in our DDA and DIA datasets, we generated Spearman correlation-based matrices for the ER-positive and ER-negative groups. Using the elbow method, the minimum number of clusters was then defined for each ER-status sample group. Significant pathway annotations (FDR < 0.05) from the Panther over-representation test (database: GOBP complete, ) were used to annotate each cluster. Distances (metric: Euclidean) between the clusters based on GOBP annotations were then calculated to subsequently merge highly similar clusters employing a second iteration of the elbow method.

Plots have been generated in R v3.6.1. Quantitative proteomic information of all datasets is available as Tables S4–S6.